The center of it is:
Truth is one, even when it has many faces. A hidden truth can be approached from different relations, times, and directions. If the views are truthful, they must eventually converge. The useful experiment is the one that forces competing possibilities to separate. Contribution comes before creation: each experiment should contribute a real distinction, and only truthful contributions should be retained.

And I would keep this separate from the study you already froze. Do not change 6fba869... or fcc62f.... Run that study exactly as frozen. This becomes the prospectively designed next study.
Codex Prompt — Horus Triangulation Learning v0
We are continuing the Horus research program in:
https://github.com/sotiriosc/horus
The currently frozen study:
research/horus-active-causal-experimentation-v0
must remain completely unchanged.
Its frozen commits are:
- Method: 6fba86981600cd1622343313c4c5daad41e6099a
- World/Data: fcc62f20014dc354c8f0133e91a6a25c002a4754
Do not alter that experiment.
Complete and publish it according to its already-frozen method.
The following describes a separate prospective follow-up study to be created only after the active-causal study is complete and published.
Horus Triangulation Learning v0
Suggested future branch:
research/horus-triangulation-learning-v0
The scientific idea for this study comes from the following principle.
Foundational principle
Truth may appear through many faces, but if those faces are truthful they belong to the same underlying reality.
A hidden variable does not always need to be observed directly.
It can be isolated by constraining reality from independent directions until competing explanations can no longer produce the same consequences.
Horus should therefore not merely ask:
What do I think is happening?

It should ask:
What is still capable of being true, and what is the smallest experiment that would force those possibilities to differ?

The framework uses three orthogonal axes:
1. TIME
Ask how an effect changes across execution:
- when does it first appear?
- how long is the delay?
- how long does it persist?
- does it decay?
- does order matter?
- does repetition matter?
- does the same intervention behave differently depending on what happened before it?
Time constrains possible explanations.
If an effect never occurs later than two steps, hypotheses requiring a five-step dependency can be removed without testing every five-step sequence.
Time therefore reduces the future search space.
2. RELATION
Ask how one thing changes another thing's behavior.
Do not only ask:
Does A affect X?

Also ask:
Does A change what B does to X?

Use controlled contrasts such as:
B
versus
A → B

or:
A → B
versus
B → A

or:
B
versus
B → B

The structural delta between matched experiments exposes:
- interaction
- suppression
- amplification
- order dependence
- conditional dependence
- independence
Relation is not merely correlation.
It is the geometry created by what changes when one controlled piece of the system changes.
3. INTENTION / DIRECTION
An experiment is not useful merely because it creates information.
It should resolve something that matters.
Ask:
What distinction am I presently trying to resolve?

or:
What target am I trying to reach?

Intention is therefore the directional vector of inquiry.
For a physical machine this need not imply psychological intention.
Operationally it means:
- the unresolved question,
- competing hypotheses,
- or target state that gives the experiment direction.
Triangulation
The three axes combine:
TIME
  \
   \
    hidden truth
   /
  /
RELATION -------- DIRECTION

Do not treat this diagram literally.
Operationally:
remaining explanations
        ↓
temporal constraints
        ↓
relational contrasts
        ↓
goal-relevant distinction
        ↓
smallest useful experiment
        ↓
real execution
        ↓
consequence
        ↓
fewer possible explanations

The purpose is not to guess hidden truth.
The purpose is to force hidden truth to constrain itself through consequence.
Contribution before creation
Every experiment should make a contribution.
A contribution is a verified distinction added to the system's understanding.
Examples:
A alone does not affect X

B affects X after two steps

A before B suppresses B's effect

B before A does not suppress the effect

These are contributions because they constrain future possibilities.
Creation is the larger structure that emerges from accumulated truthful contributions.
Therefore Horus should not be rewarded merely for:
- acting,
- producing tokens,
- running many experiments,
- changing itself,
- or appearing sophisticated.
An experiment contributes only if its consequence changes what can truthfully remain possible.
Central hypothesis
A system using explicit triangulation should need fewer experiments to identify hidden causal structure than:
1. a fixed passive experiment schedule;
2. unconstrained active exploration;
3. brute-force enumeration.
The desired behavior is:
remember what has already been tested
        ↓
identify what remains unresolved
        ↓
construct a controlled contrast
        ↓
choose the shortest experiment able to separate possibilities
        ↓
execute
        ↓
compare consequence to expectation
        ↓
update what remains possible
        ↓
only expand to longer experiments when shorter ones cannot resolve it

Critical principle: do not repeat blindly
Do NOT encode:
Never repeat an experiment.

Repeating can be informative.
Instead:
Never spend an experiment without a reason for expecting it to reduce uncertainty, test stability, verify a suspected dependency, or distinguish competing explanations.

A repeated experiment with positive discriminative value is useful.
A repeated experiment that cannot change what is known is redundant.
Controlled delta principle
Horus should prefer experiments that change one informative dimension at a time.
Examples:
B
AB

isolates the contribution of preceding A.
AB
BA

isolates ordering.
B
BB

isolates repetition/state.
B at t
B with an inserted delay

isolates temporal dependence.
The goal is not always literal one-variable experimental control, because some causal structures require combinations.
The principle is:
Prefer the smallest contrast from which the observed delta can be meaningfully attributed.

Shortest sufficient experiment
Do not immediately search long sequences.
Use a progressive hierarchy:
single actions
    ↓
pair interactions
    ↓
order comparisons
    ↓
repetition
    ↓
short temporal sequences
    ↓
longer compositions only when ambiguity remains

If shorter evidence already eliminates a class of hypotheses, do not test longer members of that eliminated class.
This is where triangulation should gain efficiency.
Candidate-rule falsification
Once Horus forms a candidate explanation, it should not merely seek confirming examples.
Ask:
What is the cheapest experiment whose result could show that my current explanation is wrong?

Prefer falsifying tests when they distinguish the incumbent explanation from a viable alternative.
Example:
Observed:
B → X changes
AB → X does not change

Candidate explanation:
A suppresses B

Do not simply run more AB examples.
Find an alternative explanation, such as:
the effect depends on order rather than A itself

Then test:
BA

Reality resolves the distinction.
Explicit experimental state
The system should maintain an auditable state such as:
{
  "established_relations": [],
  "remaining_questions": [],
  "candidate_explanations": [],
  "prior_experiments": [],
  "observed_temporal_bounds": {},
  "unresolved_interactions": [],
  "current_direction": null
}

Do not require the model to compress all history into prose.
The experiment ledger is authoritative.
The model may reason over it, but it may not rewrite authenticated past observations.
Candidate explanations are provisional
Candidate explanations are NOT Memory truths.
Separate:
AUTHENTICATED OBSERVATION

from:
MODEL HYPOTHESIS

A hypothesis gains authority only through consequences.
Do not allow repeated model assertion to promote a hypothesis.
Study question
The eventual experiment should compare at least:
Passive
Frozen schedule.
Active unconstrained
The previously tested active experiment-selection method.
Triangulation
A model receives the same evidence and experiment budget, but is instructed and represented according to the triangulation method:
1. identify the unresolved distinction;
2. identify relevant Time constraints;
3. identify relevant Relation contrasts;
4. state the experiment's Direction;
5. choose the smallest discriminating allowed probe;
6. execute;
7. compare;
8. update;
9. repeat.
Do NOT provide the correct hidden causal structure.
Do NOT give oracle information gain.
Do NOT select the experiment deterministically for the model.
The model must choose.
Triangulation proposal format
Before selecting an experiment, require a compact structured output:
{
  "unresolved_question": "...",
  "time_constraint": "...",
  "relation_contrast": "...",
  "direction": "...",
  "candidate_probe": ["..."],
  "what_outcomes_would_distinguish": "..."
}

Then execute only the valid candidate_probe.
These explanations are model behavior, not ground truth.
Score experiment utility independently afterward.
Efficiency is a primary outcome
Do not merely compare final accuracy after a fixed number of probes.
Measure how quickly useful understanding appears.
At probe counts such as:
- 1
- 2
- 3
- 4
- 6
- 8
- 12
measure:
- remaining consistent hypotheses,
- correct causal relations identified,
- sealed prediction accuracy,
- unnecessary/redundant probes,
- interactions isolated,
- time bounds discovered,
- target-relevant distinctions resolved.
The strongest possible result would be:
Triangulation reaches the same or higher predictive understanding using materially fewer executed experiments.

Extrapolation to longer sequences
This is important.
Do not brute-force every possible longer sequence.
After learning short relations, ask whether they constrain longer sequences.
Example:
If Horus establishes:
A has no persistent state effect
B has a two-step delayed effect
A suppresses B only when A immediately precedes B

then many longer sequences can already be predicted or eliminated without executing them.
Test this prospectively.
Create sealed longer sequences that were never executed during discovery.
Measure whether knowledge derived from shorter triangulated experiments allows correct extrapolation.
This is a key scientific target:
SHORT_EXPERIMENT_TO_LONG_SEQUENCE_GENERALIZATION
Do not assume it exists.
Test it.
Time as compression
Explicitly evaluate whether learned temporal bounds reduce required experimentation.
For example:
If evidence establishes:
maximum observed causal delay = 2

and the candidate hypothesis class permits verification of that bound,
then hypotheses requiring unsupported longer delays should lose support.
Do not manually delete hypotheses merely because the model says the bound is two.
Use independently verified executed consequences.
The hypothesis evaluator may calculate which possibilities remain consistent.
Relation as compression
Likewise:
If A is repeatedly established as independent of X across the relevant contexts, do not continue testing every longer sequence containing A as a supposed direct cause of X.
But preserve possibilities where A acts as a modifier if those have not been falsified.
Do not confuse:
no direct effect

with:
no relational effect

This distinction is central.
Intention as search direction
The Direction axis should prevent learning from becoming exhaustive world reconstruction when the goal requires only a narrow distinction.
Example:
If the target is to turn X on, and evidence already establishes that subsystem D cannot influence X within the available horizon, further characterization of D is not currently useful.
This does NOT mean D is globally irrelevant.
It means it is irrelevant to the present direction.
Horus should distinguish:
not relevant to current objective

from:
does not exist / has no effect

External truth boundary
Horus is never allowed to decide that its own triangulation succeeded.
Only independently evaluated consequences may establish:
- prediction correctness,
- information gained,
- hypothesis elimination,
- goal achievement,
- experiment efficiency.
The system proposes.
Reality answers.
No self-serving promotion
A change, hypothesis, experiment strategy, or learned state should never gain authority merely because it helps preserve the system's prior belief.
The system must remain capable of disproving itself.
A candidate explanation that survives only because falsifying experiments are avoided is not established.
Scientific integrity
Before inference:
- freeze environment,
- freeze hypotheses,
- freeze test worlds,
- freeze experiment budget,
- freeze scoring,
- freeze all gates.
Do not redesign worlds after seeing model behavior.
Do not alter a gate because the result is close.
Do not hide failures.
What success would mean
A successful result would support:
Horus can use controlled contrasts across time, relation and goal direction to choose experiments that reveal hidden structure more efficiently than passive or unconstrained exploration.

It would NOT establish:
- universal causal reasoning,
- consciousness,
- truth in a philosophical absolute sense,
- RSI.
Why this matters to Horus
The long-term desired loop is:
experience
    ↓
truthful consequence
    ↓
contribution
    ↓
better model of reality
    ↓
better experiment
    ↓
more informative experience
    ↓
better learning
    ↓
creation

Creation is not declared.
It emerges only from accumulated contributions that survive reality.
Future RSI connection
Do NOT implement this part in the first triangulation study.
Eventually, if triangulation itself is demonstrated, Horus may be allowed to learn from the consequences of its experiment-selection choices.
Then:
Horus chooses an experiment
        ↓
experiment provides little value
        ↓
authenticated low-contribution consequence

Horus chooses another experiment
        ↓
large uncertainty reduction
        ↓
authenticated high-contribution consequence

        ↓

parameter learning

        ↓

future Horus becomes better
at choosing experiments

This would mean the system is beginning to improve how it learns, not merely what it knows.
Only after that is demonstrated prospectively should recursive improvement be discussed.
Required completion questions
At the end of the future study, answer:
1. Did triangulation require fewer experiments than passive discovery?
2. Did it outperform unconstrained active discovery?
3. Did Time constraints reduce the search space?
4. Did Relation contrasts expose interactions that single interventions missed?
5. Did Direction prevent irrelevant experimentation?
6. Did the model preferentially construct controlled contrasts?
7. Did it use falsifying experiments rather than only confirmatory ones?
8. Could short experiments support correct predictions of longer unseen sequences?
9. Did triangulation improve goal achievement as well as prediction?
10. What aspects of the improvement came from the model versus deterministic bookkeeping/evaluation?
11. Does the evidence justify training the experiment-selection process itself?
12. What remains between this and recursive self-improvement?
Then STOP.